Hill (2002) (and the robust discussions it inspired) demonstrated the importance of looking carefully at the rhetorics used by academics when discussing Indigenous and endangered languages. Fifteen years later this still remains a subject of concern. In this article I examine how three related strategies are increasingly employed in both academic and public domains: Linguistic extraction is the process of discussing languages and language reclamation movements removed from the personal lives, communicative practices, and embodied experiences in which they inherently are embedded, while the erasure of colonial agency minimises the historical and ongoing causes of language endangerment and dormancy, sometimes to the extent of misattributing agency for such realities onto Indigenous communities themselves. Lasting is a discursive process through which Indigenous populations are framed as ‘vanishing’, first by defining Indians based on a singular characteristic, and then lamenting the passing of the ‘last’ Indians assumed to have had that single defining characteristic (O’Brien 2010). I explore the implications of these rhetorics for both endangered language movements and the communities at the center of those movements, with a particular emphasis on the discursive tactics that resist these strategies which are utilised by Indigenous community members and language activists.
From BBC News and the Guardian, the New York Times and the Huffington Post to Vodafone promotional materials, endangered languages are an increasingly pervasive topic in the media. The rhetorical strategies deployed are intended to raise public awareness about language endangerment. These strategies are the focus of this paper, which draws on a corpus of articles and online posts from the past decade published in established, English-language newspapers, media outlets, and magazines with wide, multi-national circulation in both digital and print formats, and increased dissemination through social media platforms such as Twitter, Reddit, and Facebook. The rhetorics discussed here come from examples of media coverage of language endangerment with the highest circulation, identified by the number of reader subscriptions for print media, and the number of accesses, shares, ‘likes’, and reposts for digital formats. I focus on media discussions of language endangerment, because, as Nancy Rivenburgh (2011:704) notes in her examination of how English-language media frame the causes and implications of language endangerment: ‘For better or worse, people rely heavily on media to understand how these global phenomena touch their lives’.
Specifically, I examine rhetorics surrounding language endangerment and their implications for Indigenous communities in North America and for many endangered language communities more broadly, where they create a status quo that Meek (2011:55) argues ‘constantly presents barriers, challenges, or constraints that need to be destroyed, unpacked, and deconstructed, or just changed.’ In doing so, I join a growing number of scholars who examine closely the rhetorics surrounding Indigenous languages and their impact on public and community conceptualisation, language reclamation efforts, and even language policy in order to begin to unpack these discourses (Hill 2002;Leonard 2008, 2017; Meek 2010, 2011; Perley 2012).
Hill (2002) asked academics writing about language endangerment ‘who is listening, and what do they hear?’ as a means of interrogating the underlying assumptions and entailments of language advocacy rhetoric in order to ensure that we do not ‘distress and alienate’ the communities we advocate for and with (Hill 2002:120). Fifteen years later, we have several answers. As this article will show, the world was listening. It responded through the creation of new policies and in some cases an ideological shift away from shaming and devaluing language diversity to a valorisation of those same languages. At the same time, the rhetorics identified by Hill now extend from academic papers and grant proposals into mainstream media discourses about language endangerment and the affected communities. The three themes Hill identified are: ‘universal ownership’, ‘hyperbolic valorisation’, and ‘enumeration’. Universal ownership, as Hill defines it, is the positioning of endangered languages as belonging to everyone, especially the target audiences for language advocacy, ‘who must be convinced that they “possess” this particular form of wealth and are somehow responsible for it’ (Hill 2002:121). A related process is hyperbolic valorisation through which languages are framed as ‘resources’ that have ‘value’, utilizing economic metaphors such as languages being ‘treasures’ or ‘priceless’. Finally, enumeration involves the ‘essentialization and individualization of a language as a sort of unit’ (Hill 2002:127), and heavy reliance on statistical representations to describe endangered languages at a global scale. Critically, Hill does not argue that all uses of these themes are bad, but rather that researchers should consider their rhetorical strategies carefully, including alternative frameworks of representation such as a rhetoric of human rights.
Building on Hill’s framework, I examine three additional related strategies that are increasingly deployed in both academic and public domains, and which are evidenced in the corpus of popular and scholarly texts reviewed in this paper: linguistic extraction, erasure or misattribution of colonial agency, and ‘lasting’. Linguistic extraction is the process of discussing languages and language reclamation movements extracted from the personal lives, communicative practices, and embodied experiences in which they are inherently embedded. The erasure of colonial agency minimises historical and ongoing causes of language endangerment and dormancy, sometimes to the extent of misattributing agency onto Indigenous communities themselves. Lasting draws on O’Brien’s (2010) identification of the discursive and semiotic process through which Indigenous populations are framed as ‘vanishing’, and applies it specifically to practices within the context of Indigenous and endangered languages. It is replicated in discussions about ‘last speakers’ and over-emphasis on declining speaker populations (Muehlmann 2012) rather than new speakers and positive language reclamation effects. By examining these widely circulating rhetorics, within studies of broader colonial framings of Indigenous people within Native American and Indigenous studies, I will demonstrate how such rhetorics both draw on existing trends within settler societies and continue to influence them. Then, I will ‘listen’ to a different body of rhetoric – produced by members of endangered language communities and in ethnographic accounts of language reclamation – in search of discursive strategies of linguistic survivance that resist colonial tropes and neo-colonial desires of language-as-resource extraction. 
The first trend that emerges in media coverage of language endangerment is linguistic extraction, i.e. defining, analysing, and representing languages and the people connected to them separately from the complex socio-historical, political, and deeply personal contexts in which they actually occur. Linguistic extraction, then, renders languages into extractable objects that can be collected, preserved, utilised, and even admired. Critically, linguistic extraction is not solely the collection of endangered and Indigenous languages in ways that often render them inaccessible to their communities, but also the presentation of languages as objects, or data, without their complex and varied human contexts. In his analysis of both popular and scholarly literature about endangered languages, Moore (2006:297) asserts that it ‘summons its readers to an encounter with these languages as monuments in a sculpture garden of human cognitive achievements, objects of wonder and appreciation’. Like the natural resources and ‘treasures’ with which they have been frequently aligned, Indigenous and endangered languages – as a whole or in their component pieces – are frequently utilised in processes labeled ‘mining’ and ‘harvesting’ by researchers within this extractive framework. This literal and metaphorical extraction from context is itself a colonial enterprise and often a cornerstone of Western science – one that removes people from homelands, loots objects from graves in the name of science and education, and disassociates products from those who labour to produce them. In other words, it celebrates the empire in empirical. Extraction is the foundation of enumeration identified by Hill, where qualities of languages or people are counted and then detached from their larger dynamics.
Linguistic extraction also happens in valuing linguistic data over the speakers from whom it comes, and the communities and contexts in which it is produced. Take, for example, this representative excerpt from a National Geographic article on ‘Languages racing to extinction in 5 global “hotspots”’ (Lovegren 2007:1) setting up the backdrop for the story’s focus on language endangerment: In the last 500 years, an estimated half of the world’s languages, from Etruscan to Tasmanian, have become extinct. But researchers say the languages of the world are now vanishing faster than ever in recorded history. More than 500 languages may be spoken by fewer than ten people. In this article, which had over 8,000 ‘likes’ and around 2,000 ‘shares’ on Facebook alone, decontextualised enumeration allows for the available numbers to appear randomised, as though in a world with thousands of languages, all are equally at risk of endangerment; or, in a community with 500 speakers and a population of 50,000, any individual out of 100 might be a speaker. In reality, these numbers are embedded in particular (but interrelated) geographic, socio-economic, familial, and historical contexts. Their rhetorical presupposition reveals another level of extraction frequently utilised in media discussion of language endangerment: the erasure of factors that shape language shift. In Lovegren (2007) no rationale is given for why the last 500 years might be a significantly different moment in language transmission, even though it coincides with the period of European and American colonialism and globalisation.
A 2014 ‘op-doc’ piece ‘Who speaks Wukchumni?’ in the New York Times has a similar representation of language endangerment in its introduction to a short documentary about a fluent speaker who wrote the first comprehensive dictionary of the language (Vaughan-Lee 2014): Throughout the Unites States, many Native Americans languages are struggling to survive. According to Unesco, more than 130 of these languages are currently at risk, with 74 languages considered ‘critically endangered.’ These languages preserve priceless cultural heritage, and some hold unexpected value – nuances in these languages convey unparalleled knowledge of the natural world. Many of these at-risk languages are found in my home state of California. Now for some, only a few fluent speakers remain.
The short article then describes the documentary’s primary subject, Marie Wilcox, without a single mention of why so many Native American languages are ‘struggling to survive’. This form of linguistic extraction erases the very causes, historical and ongoing, of language endangerment. In the context of seemingly transparent numbers outlining the ‘crisis’ or ‘epidemic’ of language endangerment and a sudden, if de-historicised valuing of Indigenous languages by a global public, readers are left with the looming question – why?
The long view of human language shows us that language shift and change – especially shifts into language dormancy – do not simply occur outside of sociopolitical factors; thus, we know that languages are dynamic, and inherently in motion through intergenerational transmission that moves them forward through generations and spaces. Borrowing conceptually from Newton’s first law of motion, we can posit that languages tend to remain in motion – being transmitted to subsequent generations – unless an external force is applied to them. Omitting those forces from discussions of language endangerment leaves out a critical piece of the equation and contributes to the larger pattern of erasure originating in settler-colonialism – this omission is particularly problematic when such forces are still actively at work. Here, linguistic extraction is the gateway rhetorical process to the erasure of colonial agency and the misattribution of agency onto endangered language communities for their own linguistic demise, discussed in the next section.