Such erasure or deflection of colonial agency is not limited to linguistic endangerment. As Deer (2015:x) notes in her analysis of sexual violence in Native American communities within the United States, the term ‘epidemic’ is often applied to describe the egregious numbers of violent sexual assaults against Indian women: Using the word epidemic deflects responsibility because it fails to acknowledge the agency of perpetrators and those who allow the problem to continue. The word also utterly fails to account for the crisis’s roots in history and law. Using the word epidemic to talk about violence in Indian country is to depoliticize rape. It is a fundamental misstatement of the problem.
Here, Deer argues that the dominant discourses surrounding the pervasive sexual violence against Native American women, particularly framing it as an ‘epidemic’, erases the agent(s) and causes(s) of those realities; to present violence as naturally occurring not only ‘depoliticises’ the problem, but also absolves culpable parties of any responsibility. Similarly, the erasure of the sociohistorical dynamics which shape every aspect of language endangerment – especially as they relate to settler colonial nation states and their overt and covert policies aimed at destroying language transmission – then, is, to quote Deer, ‘a fundamental misstatement of the problem’.
While the role, and agency, of colonial powers is erased, the assignment of agency is not absent from media discussion of language endangerment. In fact, the blame for the plight of Indigenous languages is often ascribed to the communities themselves, or individuals within them. This is perhaps most visible in the metaphor of ‘language suicide’, which posits that a group that loses its language may do so by choice (Denison 1977). However, as Crawford (1995:24) notes, the ‘suicide’ frame of language death ‘explains little about the social forces underlying such choices. Whether deliberate or not, the notion of language suicide fosters a victim-blaming strategy’. Media representations frequently use language denoting that full (de-historicised) agency regarding the future of languages lies with endangered language communities. The title of the previously-cited National Geographic 2007 article, ‘Languages racing to extinction’, brings to mind a competition for fun or sport toward language attrition. Linguists working on language documentation are quoted describing the context in which language shift occurs (emphasis mine):
[Gregory] Anderson, of the Enduring Voices Project, agreed that social pressures play a prominent role... ‘Language endangerment happens when a community decides that their language is somehow a social or economic impediment,’ he said. [K. David] Harrison said children are often the ones who decide to effectively abandon a native tongue. ‘Children are little barometers of social prestige,’ he said. ‘[I]n most cases, languages die a slow death, as people simply abandon their native tongues when they become surrounded by people speaking a more common language.’
In these statements, communities ‘decide’ their languages are ‘somehow ... impediments’, causing them to ‘simply abandon’ them. Language shift and language acquisition are represented as fully agentive choices linked only to ‘social prestige’ and ‘social pressures’ or some kind of unknowable impediment, and, while the inclusion of ‘social pressures’ hints at external factors, the final and repeated emphasis places agency on the community. The placement of agency on children here is particularly problematic when we consider that children are often the primary target of linguistic violence and regimes of cultural genocide (e.g., boarding schools, child welfare act, removal policies),, while simultaneously having the least power within the sociocultural language dynamics in which they are represented as ‘simply’ making such choices.
Children are not the only people within endangered language communities singled out as the agents of language attrition in the media. In communities where endangered languages are spoken fluently by few people, particular individuals are often identified as the cause of the decline of language transmission. Perhaps the most widely discussed example is the (partially fictionalised) story of two speakers, Manuel Segovia and Isidro Velázquez, of the Indigenous language Ayapaneco in Mexico. A 2011 Huffington Post article about the now infamous feud between two men presents the situation as follows (emphasis mine): Though the language has been spoken in what is now Mexico for centuries, there are only two people left who can speak Ayapaneco fluently. Like so many other indigenous languages, it’s at risk of extinction – even more so because, as the Guardian reports, the last two speakers are refusing to talk to each other. This widely circulated and re-worked story was shared from the Huffington Post webpage over 3,500 times, and also became the focal point of a campaign and advertisement series by the British telecommunications company, Vodafone. The two fluent speakers of Ayapaneco are repeatedly identified as the reason Ayapaneco will not be spoken by future generations using a rhetoric that parallels the placement of all agency in language endangerment onto Indigenous communities (see Suslak 2011 for a response and thorough contextualisation of the Ayapaneco media coverage and its consequences). Phrasing like ‘it’s at risk of extinction ... because the last two speakers are refusing to talk to each other’ directly links language dormancy – here problematically called ‘extinction’ (discussed further in section 1.3, below) – to the very late-in-life actions of two individuals whose personal feelings toward each other are of no consequence to a world desperate to extract valuable knowledge hidden within the treasure chest of Indigenous languages. From this external evaluative perspective, Indigenous people owe it to the rest of the world not only to provide aspects of their culture, life, and knowledge of the world to outsiders on demand, but also to be friends with anyone else involved in accommodating those demands.
The author of a 2014 BBC article took a similar approach to the title of her article about the language dynamics of an Indigenous community in California: ‘The people who want their language to disappear’ (emphasis mine). In it, she describes a small Native American community who has decided that language documentation by outsiders simply to preserve aspects of the language for scientific goals did not fit with their understanding of how languages should exist. After only three days visiting the community, which includes her relatives, the author, who is from Wales, concludes her discussion with: ‘In the age of mass information, the choice of the Maidu shows that without trust and engagement, valuable knowledge and understanding can be lost forever’ (emphasis mine). Here, the ‘choice’ of the Maidu is combined with an additional extraction in terms of language endangerment and loss disconnected from the conditions of the Maidu community. Such articles never lament the decline or demise of Indigenous sovereignty or autonomy, the loss of political, economic, or geographic stability and power, or even the strong correspondence of language attrition with the actual necropolitical dynamics in marginalised communities. In fact, as I discuss in the next section, Indigenous (language) death is only noteworthy when it is the ‘last’.
Marie Wilcox, Manuel Segovia, and Isidro Velázquez are all part of an increasingly publically circulating discourse about ‘last speakers’ of Indigenous and endangered languages. Of the rhetorical strategies in news media discussed in this paper, ‘lasting’ may be the most prevalent. Historian and Native studies scholar O’Brien (2010) coins the term lasting for the discursive process through which Indigenous populations are framed within local New England histories as ‘vanishing’ by defining Indians based on a singular characteristic – full blood quantum in the case of nineteenth century New England. Lasting, then is a process of what Irvine & Gal (2000) call iconisation (rhematisation) and erasure. First, specific individuals or characteristics are made iconically representative of larger wholes – be they groups, languages, or cultures. Erasure happens in two concomitant processes: (1) other characteristics or people that could be representative of the larger whole are erased; and (2) the larger whole is erased through the countdown, or ‘lasting’, of those iconic few. Lasting is, then, a specific configuration of hyperbolic valorisation and enumeration.
The reporting of last speakers of endangered languages is a centuries-old genre of counting down to the inevitable end of Indigenous people, assuming an unavoidable loss of culture, space, and eventually, existence. Consider the first words of Thurman’s (2015) New Yorker article, ‘A loss for words: Can a dying language be saved?’ (emphasis mine): It is a singular fate to be the last of one’s kind. That is the fate of the men and women, nearly all of them elderly, who are – like Marie Wilcox, of California; Gyani Maiya Sen, of Nepal; Verdena Parker, of Oregon; and Charlie Mungulda, of Australia – the last known speakers of a language.
While each individual represents a particular type of speaker within much larger communities, they are presented as ‘the last of [their] kind’. Such rhetoric directly reflects 17th century descriptions of the ‘last of’ tribes in New England, as well as popular accounts such as The Last of the Mohicans (Cooper 1888), The Last of the Dogmen (Hershey et al. 1995), and Ishi the Last Yahi: A Documentary History (Heizer & Kroeber 1979), where specific individuals (historical or fictional) were held up as the last of their community, thereby marking the extinction of whole groups of Indians, and all Native Americans more generally. This technique is used to make spectacularly famous (and famous spectacles of) individuals, like Ishi, deemed to be the ‘last’. Thus, National Geographic hosts a webpage that invites readers to ‘See and Hear Last Speakers of Dying Languages’, Wikipedia lists 59 individuals from around the globe in a ‘List of last known speakers of languages’, and, as mentioned above, various online news outlets circulated a story throughout 2011 and subsequent years titled: ‘Last two speakers of dying language refuse to talk to each other’.
There are three elements of the lasting of endangered languages that are of particular importance. Firstly, those identified as the ‘last’ speakers of languages are only very specifically understood as ‘speakers’ in a narrowly defined way: native speakers (those who learned the language from birth/childhood); monolingual (speaking only the language of interest); fully fluent (those able to participate in any and all domains of language use and communication in the language); mentally sound; and with a particular heritage (ethnic and/or cultural origins within the communities associated with the language). However, these are not the same criteria applied to the classification of ‘speakers’ of non-endangered languages, and such a narrow restriction of who gets counted as a speaker, or a holder of linguistic expertise and knowledge, erases those who fit one or more, but not all of the listed qualities. As Leonard & Haynes (2010:279) point out, researcher determinations of who is, and is not a speaker ‘without having come to understand what being a speaker means within the cultural context extends the historical colonialist practice of imposing Western ways of knowing without acknowledging that other ways of knowing exist’. Furthermore, narrow, linguistically-derived definitions of speakerhood effectively erase bilingual speakers and learners, and exclude potential members of multilingual communities (De Korne 2017).