Linguistic anthropologist Paul Kroskrity (2000b) notes that this multiplicity of identity positions may play out differently in diverse contexts. While modern, global interactions between more or less anonymous individuals create a heightened need for individuals to utilize broader semiotic systems to convey specific identities (112), he is quick to point out that it would be incorrect to assume that the same need is absent within smaller, more close- knit communities. In such population dynamics, he explains, “Interaction typically occurs between people, often kin or fictive kin, who know each other in so many roles that they must interactionally establish which identity is situationally relevant” (113). Within the Chickasaw community, individuals must negotiate the most relevant of many available identities in a given interactional moment; for the most part, the remaining native Speakers of Chickasaw come from a small number of families and many are related to each other and the other participants in our language revitalization efforts. So in the context of a language committee meeting, for example, participants may index their available identities relating to familial connections, occupation, community roles, language expertise, and so on. In sum, identities are not innate, prediscursive states; rather, they are constantly shaped and reshaped through interactions with others. Furthermore, individuals do not have a single, unitary identity; any one individual has numerous available sociocultural positions that become relevant depending on the immediate context. In fact, in her work on Indigenous language and identity in thenorthwest Amazon in Brazil, Sarah Shulist (2016) has demonstrated that Indigenous people must negotiate identity dynamics across a spectrum of “graduated authenticity” in which they are not simply negotiating what it means to be Indigenous along a binary of “‘authentic’ and ‘inauthentic’ Indigenous or non- Indigenous— but rather one in which varying degrees of authenticity can be assigned based on different ideological configurations of the language-identity relationship” (113). By focusing on a context of Indigenous identity within these shifting sociopolitical dynamics, this book seeks to excavate some of the heterogeneous and complex notions of Indigenous selves that exist in Indigenous communities of the Americas. How do members of an Indigenous community situated in a rapidly changing economic and demographic landscape negotiate their national and ethnic identities? How does an orientation to learning the Chickasaw language define indigeneity? This book will contribute to discussions of the complexity of Native identity and language (and cultural) revitalization.
Identity positions are performed and negotiated through language. As such, this book draws on the “tactics of intersubjectivity” proposed by Mary Bucholtz and Kira Hall (2004), in which the individual is seen both as subject to social processes and the subject of those processes. That is, individual identity is seen as resulting from both individual agency, including both deliberate performances and habitual practices, and social structures that the individual does not directly control. In other words, individuals do not have a single, unitary identity, but locate themselves relative to a variety of available sociocultural positions. Identity positions are thus negotiated and emergent in discourse as interactants position themselves (and are themselves positioned) with regard to any number of identity characteristics and groups. 
Recent research on the emergence of identity in interaction demonstrates that individuals are constantly tasked by any number of identity categories, discourse positions, and social qualities. Linguistic anthropologist Gabriella Modan’s (2007) concepts of “centralized” and “marginalized” identities are useful for interrogating the intersection of place and identity in Chickasaw discourses. In her analysis of how inhabitants of the Mount Pleasant neighborhood in Washington, D.C., work to frame themselves as authentic members of the neighborhood—while framing others as inauthentic or unacceptable— Modan proposes three kinds of local identities: 1) various identities for the neighborhood itself, 2) identities that speakers create for themselves as core community members, which we can call centralized identities, and 3) identities that speakers create for others as lesser community members, which we can refer to as marginalized identities. (7) Similarly, negotiations over which identities count as authentically Chickasaw (and over the type of place the Chickasaw Nation used to be, is, or should be) are articulated through a wide variety of social contexts and linguistic genres. Residents draw on these semiotic resources—and reinforce or contest them—in their interactions with each other and with broader institutions.
Four discourses are commonly employed to discuss belonging in the Chickasaw Nation. The first discourse defines the nation as a group of people who live, and have lived, within the geographic and political boundaries of the Chickasaw Nation. This discourse positions those who have always (since relocation) lived within the tribal jurisdiction in south-central Oklahoma as centralized members of the community. Those who are from families with deep history in the region fit that categorization particularly strongly, while individuals who have lived in diaspora for part or all of their lives may be accorded a less central status. In this discursive framework, statements such as “She still lives on her family’s original allotment” authenticate the referent’s centralized identity position.