THIS IS A TYPICAL introduction in Chikashshanompa’, or the Chickasaw language, but I didn’t learn how to say it until I was in my early twenties. Like practically every other Chickasaw of my generation, I didn’t learn Chikashshanompa’ growing up, and neither did most of my mother’s generation. My grandfather learned pieces from his grandfather—mostly important daily phrases and the names of everyday objects—but he could only remember a few into adulthood.
I first learned these phrases in 2007 in one of the Chickasaw language community classes in Ada, Oklahoma. After each of the students around the table introduced ourselves in Chickasaw, the instructor, a Chickasaw Speaker in her sixties, beamed and proclaimed, “That’s it! Now you’re talking Indian.” In south-central Oklahoma where our class was located, and in much of Indian Country, using an Indigenous language is colloquially referred to as “talking Indian.” In fact, among older Chickasaw community members, the phrase to “talk Indian” or “speak Indian” is used more often than the specific language name of Chikashshanompa’ or Chickasaw. While it references a time when the majority or all of the community would have spoken those Indigenous languages by default, this colloquialism also reflects the strong I first learned these phrases in 2007 in one of the Chickasaw language community classes in Ada, Oklahoma. After each of the students around the table introduced ourselves in Chickasaw, the instructor, a Chickasaw Speaker in her sixties, beamed and proclaimed, “That’s it! Now you’re talking Indian.” In south-central Oklahoma where our class was located, and in much of Indian Country, using an Indigenous language is colloquially referred to as “talking Indian.” In fact, among older Chickasaw community members, the phrase to “talk Indian” or “speak Indian” is used more often than the specific language name of Chikashshanompa’ or Chickasaw. While it references a time when the majority or all of the community would have spoken those Indigenous languages by default, this colloquialism also reflects the strong 
This book explores the intersections of Indigenous community, identity, and language. It examines how Chickasaw community members in Oklahoma utilize discourses and broader semiotics related to language revitalization to claim and contest visions of our tribe during a period of rapid economic and demographic shifts. Using the tools of discourse analysis and ethnography, this book aims to reexamine theories of identity in light of the changing landscape of Indigenous life in Oklahoma. Prior to statehood in 1907, Oklahoma was designated “Indian Territory” because of its position as a relocation destination for more than forty-five tribal nations as part of the Indian Removal Act of 1830. The state name reflects this reality, parsing as okla, “people” (or “town” in some dialects),+ homa, “red,” in both Chick- asaw and Choctaw. This etymology is not lost on citizens of the Chickasaw Nation: In their everyday discourses, they refer to the state of Oklahoma as “Indian Country.”
Linguistic anthropology has long been interested in, and to an extent was founded upon, studies of language in American Indian cultures (e.g., Boas 1911; Sapir 1915; Whorf 1943; Hymes 1981). In recent decades, much attention has been paid to the conditions precipitating and resulting from Indigenous language loss, as well as the sociocultural linguistic practices that reflect those realities. Such studies also have expanded the scope of Native American language research to emphasize the importance of including signed languages and gestures (Farnell 1995; Sandoval 2016), music and singing (Faudree 2013; Jacobsen 2017; Snyder 2016), and verbal art (Sherzer and Webster 2015; Fitzgerald 2017). This book draws inspiration from this rich body of work by considering the impacts of language revitalization in the Chickasaw Nation across multiple domains and types of language use, from spoken and written discourses to messages on T-shirts, and across both temporary and more permanent shifts in the linguistic landscape.
In efforts of language revitalization, much emphasis is placed on increasing the number of speakers, improving the abilities of those with language skills, and creating materials to further the first two goals (Hinton 2003). But successful revitalization depends not only on shifting the number of proficient speakers but also on recognizing (1) the complex contexts in which Indigenous languages were, are, and will be spoken; (2) the language ideologies and practices that shape Indigenous language use and reclamation; and (3) the ways in which language revitalization efforts are themselves reshaping both linguistic norms and social realities within Indigenous communities (Kroskrity 2000a; Ahlers 2006; Meek 2010; Perley 2011; Nevins 2013; Debenport 2015). My book focuses on this reshaping through considering the multilingual and multimodal practices and ideologies within the context of the Chickasaw Nation’s active resistance to language shift to English.
Specifically, I argue that the links between these movements and the increased economic growth via tribal enterprise play a crucial role in explaining the ongoing success of certain language revitalization efforts, such as that of the Chickasaw Nation. To that end, I examine processes central to discussions of globalization as they relate to language revitalization, focusing on the ways in which the nation’s economic enterprise and growth drive each of these processes. Accordingly, this study explores the extent to which there is “complicity between culture and commerce” within the Chickasaw Nation (Comaroff and Comaroff 2009, 23). I analyze the spoken discourses of individual members of the community, especially those who participate in the various language activities offered by the tribe, in order to show that language revitalization efforts are inextricably tied to, and embedded in, semiotic ideologies, occupational and economic realities, and negotiations of diaspora.
A quick note on terminology and numbers: Because the specific social, political, and economic role of those deemed (fluent, first-language) Speakers of Chickasaw (and other endangered languages) is in many ways distinct from the general use of the term speaker to denote anyone who produces language in a given context, I use Speaker for the former and speaker for the latter. I discuss these distinctions in depth in chapter 2. Also, this book represents research conducted over a decade, during which the various numbers for remaining Speakers (problematic as they may be; see chapter 4), citizenship of the Chickasaw Nation, and other arenas have changed. In many ways these changes are at the heart of the themes discussed in this book; as such, throughout the book, the numbers given will reflect either the numbers true to the specific moments under discussion or those representative of 2017.
Throughout my fieldwork, diaspora emerged as a critical element in the dynamics of the Chickasaw Nation as a whole and in language revitalization efforts more specifically. As such, this section focuses on diaspora as an essential element in our understandings of historical and contemporary Indigenous realities. While the broad definition of diaspora that exists is beneficial for drawing connections between disparate communities and historical processes, there is still a need to differentiate and account for the various demographic and geographic realities and histories that exist within the multiple contexts to which the term diaspora is applied. While the United States and Canada usually enter into the discussion of diaspora as endpoints for relocating populations, I outline the concept as it emerges in Indige- nous history and contemporary realities in Native North America in order  to diversify our models of diaspora. I hope to offer a critical vocabulary to discuss types of shifting ethno-scapes that are specific to Native North America yet are also seen in other contexts. While the concept of “diaspora” has not frequently been applied to Indigenous communities in North America, I posit it as one of the most relevant concepts to understanding modern Native lived experience(s).
Within diaspora studies, the debate of exactly how diaspora should be defined, and whom the term should be applied to, is ongoing. On the one hand, some scholars find the definition of diaspora too broad in that it includes situations, histories, and peoples that are extremely disparate. Jana Evans- Braziel and Annita Mannur (2003), for example, complain that diaspora “is often used as a catch-all phrase to speak of and for all movements, however privileged, and for all dislocations, even symbolic ones” (3). In the face of such open-gate generality, some scholars have proposed narrowing the definition of diaspora together with the communities and experiences that fall under its theorization. Cultural anthropologist Aihwa Ong (2008), for instance, emphasizes the inability to return to homelands as the core element of diaspora, suggesting that today, “Few immigrants are truly exiles, or experiencing diaspora in its original sense of a lack of hope of return to one’s homeland” and that “transnationalism” is a better term (87).
I suggest, following others, that the way to keep diaspora as a concept broad enough to include a wide myriad of lived experiences while still being cohesive enough to allow us to analyze those experiences productively is to delineate different models of diaspora. Toward that goal, I define diaspora broadly as “the displacement of subjects.” Important to my discussion is Robin Cohen’s (2001) suggestion that “a member’s adherence to a diasporic community is demonstrated by an acceptance of an inescapable link of their past migration history and a sense of co-ethnicity with others of a similar background” (64).
Cultural anthropologist Arjun Appadurai (1996) frames the United States and Canada as “another diasporic switching point” (172) to underscore how the arrival of diasporic populations from elsewhere forced the creation of new diasporas from within. Yet scholars have overwhelmingly focused on the world populations that have arrived on North American shores instead of on the original inhabitants of North America that were displaced by these arrivals. Indeed, in their overview of the field of diaspora studies, Evans-Braziel and Mannur (2003) omit North America altogether in their list of diasporic “points of departure”: “Diaspora has been theorized from many diverse points of departure—East Asian, South Asian, Southeast Asian, Asian Pacific, Caribbean, South American, Latin American, African, and Central European” (5). North America is not the only area of the world omitted in this list, of course; also absent are Australia and Aotoroa/New Zealand, both of which similarly stand as significant starting points of Indigenous diaspora.
If diasporas are defined as dispersed networks of peoples who share a common historical experience of displacement, dispossession, and dislocation, then surely Indigenous peoples are just as diasporic as other ethnic or national groups commonly associated with this theoretical framework, particularly given the way they are so often intimately associated with specific geographic settings. At the broadest level, all North American Indigenous communities could be said to be diasporic for one or all of the following reasons: (1) they are no longer located in their homelands (due to relocation), (2) they are not authorized to exhibit political control over the entirety of their original territories, and/or (3) they do not have access to full political sovereignty, even if they may practice various levels of tribal sovereignty.
Recognizing the pervasiveness of diaspora as an Indigenous reality not only shines a light on settler colonial practices since their inception on the continent, but it also allows us to study the ways in which Indigenous net- works have acted to disrupt, resist, and ultimately co-opt attempts to disperse, and therefore eliminate, Indigenous political, cultural, and economic sovereignty. These local and global networks have allowed for the maintenance and revitalization of Indigenous traditions across ever-changing ethnoscapes, as well as for the innovation of new movements and strategies. My goal is not to fetishize the “origins” of Indigenous peoples, nor is it an attempt to limit the spaces and places where “authentic” indigeneity is found. To the contrary, my goal is specifically to recognize all of the spaces where Indigenous people are found and the networks that connect them. In doing so, I hope to clear the ground for a different way of talking about diaspora that critically extends the insights of our received explanatory models. Although these models have allowed us to produce studies of diaspora that are highly nuanced and complex, we must also recognize their limits and the need to go beyond them. In addressing this gap, I propose three processes of diaspora based on Native American, and more specifically Chickasaw, history:en masse relocation, diffusion, and de-diasporization. Each model is meant to capture both the process and the demographic and geographic reality that the process produces.
The diasporization of populations generally occurs spatially either en masse or through diffusion. Within the history of the Chickasaw Nation, the first and most iconic process of diaspora was an en masse relocation. With enmasse movements, a large group—sometimes the entirety of a given community or nation— is relocated from their homelands.
The homelands of the Chickasaw Nation, or Chikashsha i yaakni’, was centered around what is today Tupelo, Mississippi. It encompassed more than thirty-eight thousand square miles of the southeastern United States and included areas of present-day Mississippi, Alabama, Kentucky, and Tennessee (Dyson 2014, 1). Our original territories were neighbored by other Muskogean tribes—the Choctaw, Muskogee Creek, and, more distantly, the Seminoles— as well as non-Muskogean communities, such as the Cherokee and Natchez.
Prior to European arrival, the Chickasaw population is estimated to have numbered between thirty-five hundred and forty-five hundred, making them a relatively small group when compared to their Choctaw neighbors, who numbered around twenty thousand (Atkinson 2004). The Chickasaw encountered Europeans for the first time in 1540 when Hernando De Soto’s expedition reached Chickasaw territory; they were ultimately able to force the Spanish expedition out of their territory after four months of interaction.
Between the mid-1500s and 1800s, the Chickasaw traded and allied predominately with the English over the French (Gibson [1971] 2012), as well as against the increasingly less-present Spanish. This became a point of distinction from our Choctaw neighbors, who allied primarily with the French. In fact, much of Chickasaw history prior to 1762 is characterized by the antagonization of French settlements and traders, which led in some cases to mutually declared war. These included two Chickasaw-French wars (1736, 1739), during which the Chickasaw were able to thwart the military efforts of French forces up to four times the size of the entire Chickasaw population. Such interactions led to an overall reputation of the Chickasaw as “the Spartans of the Mississippi Valley” (7) and prompted the following description, which appeared in the 1726 Memoir of Louisiana: “These people breathe nothing but war . . . [and] are unquestionably the bravest of the continent” (494).
Eventually, the Spanish, then English, and finally the U.S. government gained control of the Southeast. As the population of the United States grew, so too did the desire for westward expansion into Chickasaw homelands. In the 1830s, the U.S. government, led by President Andrew Jackson, began an aggressive campaign to relocate Native American tribes; during Jackson’s presidency, more than forty-six thousand Native Americans were removed from their homelands in the Southeast, thereby opening 25 million acres for occupation by predominately white settlers. One of the most prominent aspects of this campaign was the Indian Removal Act of 1830, under which Indigenous nations east of the Mississippi River were relocated to Indian Territory in the current state of Oklahoma. Through this militarily enforced government policy, the entirety of the Chickasaw Nation—along with large portions of the Muskogee (Creek), Seminole, Choctaw, and Cherokee Nations— was relocated from 1837 to 1838 in what has been memorialized as the Trail of Tears. Each tribe was given territory within Oklahoma, although those territories were dramatically reduced as more and more tribes were relocated to the area. In total, Oklahoma became home to forty-seven federally recognized tribal governments. Within the Chickasaw Nation today, our homelands still play a critical role in defining Chickasaw identity and culture. People still refer to our homelands on a regular basis and make trips to visit either on their own or through tribally organized tours such as the Homeland Tour arranged annually for elders.
While en masse relocation is easily the most iconic determiner of Chickasaw diaspora, a second type, diffusion, or the dissipation of populations across space as individuals or small groups, has also fundamentally defined Chickasaw history. Diffusion is not only the movement or migration of peoples; it is also the disruption of access to institutionalized power, space, and sovereignty. Under this model, there are two processes of diffusion that create diaspora: internal and external.
The first, internal diffusion, results from practices that disperse local communities within their own homeland through the influx of foreign bodies, political entities, and their enterprises. This book attributes internal diffusion to a process that I am a calling “accumulation through dispersion,” or privatization, through which public assets—in this case land—are privatized and commodified. This process has contributed to a linguistic and social diaspora even within the geographic boundaries of the Chickasaw Nation’s territory in Oklahoma. For example, the Dawes Act, or General Allotment Act of 1887, divided the collectively owned lands of the Chickasaw Nation into individual parcels and then made them the private holdings of individual citizens. This meant that non-Natives—and notably U.S. and Oklahoma governmental agencies and private corporations—were able to inherit or purchase the land itself and the mineral (oil) rights. As a result, the tribe’s citizens and political power are dispersed even within the jurisdiction of the Chickasaw Nation. Primary and secondary schools, for instance, are under the purview of the state education system, and city and state police forces have jurisdiction alongside Chickasaw authorities throughout the tribe’s jurisdiction. This internal dispersal has had various impacts on language revitalization efforts within the tribe. For example, when working to create Chickasaw language classes for the high school level, the Language Department had to go through the process of gaining approval and certifi- cation from the Oklahoma State Board of Education as a foreign language curriculum. The restructured Chickasaw Nation encompasses thirteen counties in south-central Oklahoma. The government seat is in Ada, in the northeast corner of the tribe’s area (see figure 2).
When the Chickasaw population was diffused internally, it was also dispersed externally as a result of both U.S. government policies and general pressures to leave the tribal jurisdiction. Where internal diffusion is the dispersing of a community through the influx of outside individuals, groups, corporations, and governments, external diffusion is the dispersing of individuals and small groups to areas outside of an established home territory. One example of external diffusion was produced through the Urban Indian Relocation Act of 1956, which worked to relocate Native peoples individually or as families to urban locations throughout the United States, such as Chicago, New York City, San Francisco, and Denver. Through this policy, hundreds of Chickasaw families relocated outside of the tribal jurisdiction in Oklahoma to select metropolitan locales, becoming part of the 78 percent  of Native Americans and Alaskan Natives living outside of their tribal jurisdiction, according to 2010 U.S. Census Bureau statistics. Critically, Teresa McCarty and Richard E. Littlebear (2013) remind us that this movement of Indigenous peoples outside of their tribal jurisdictions does not represent a severing of community ties or Indigenous identity, pointing out that there “is often a great deal of transmigration of individuals and families back and forth between urban and rural/reservation areas” (7). In other words, Native Americans in diaspora often maintain their familial and cultural networks in both their home communities and where they currently live (see Ferguson [2013] for an excellent example of this in Indigenous communities outside
of North America).
