Typically regional language centres are referred to in the context of supporting documentation, materials production and school programs, and often employ university-trained linguists and other ‘experts’ to work on individual languages. Despite many successful projects facilitated by the Kimberley Language Resource Centre, this approach did not result in sustainable revival strategies for Kimberley languages and has not dramatically increased language use. We describe how the organisation has in recent years gathered Aboriginal community perspectives on language revi- val resulting in a revision of the strategic plan and management model. The organisation’s focus is now strongly directed towards community-managed revival with emphasis on promoting pre-school language acquisition. After summarising the reasons for changing direction we refer to the strategies being used to support it. We then go on to discuss how this approach struggles to receive support outside the Aboriginal communities the organisation works with. Grant bodies, particularly government ones, are reliant on Western academic perspectives on maintenance and revival when assessing funding submissions. In neither the organisation’s context nor the social context do they accept with equal validity Aboriginal people’s perspectives on how to revive their own languages. The Kimberley Language Resource Centre was established under a model of self-governance in the early spirit of self-determination. After briefly describing the operational changes and current strategies we conclude by setting out the difficultis of getting support for Aboriginal self-determined strategies. We do this by asking two questions: (a) whose responsbility is language continuation at the community level and why does the answer, the community, pose a problem for the Kimberley Language Resource Centre? and (b) why are Aboriginal revival strategies seen as less valid than the strategies of Western academia and education?
The aim of this paper is to tell a story. The story covers the beginnings of the organisation, a summary of its operational practices past and present, a summary of its project strategies and finally a discussion about where the Kimberley Language Resource Centre (KLRC) is placed in the fight to continue the Aboriginal languages of the Kimberley, a region of great linguistic diversity. It is not possible in such a short paper to go into great detail about differing academic versus community views on endangered languages work. The KLRC has employed and continues to employ a wide variety of Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal administrative and language staff and consultants. Naturally each comes with their own worldviews and their own opinions on what is best.
However it is important to establish clearly that the the KLRC is an Aboriginal organisation which, under its governance model, is directed not by its staff but by its members and the Board of Directors2 elected from the membership. Successive boards have taken the advice of its staff, particularly linguists, but in recent years directors have begun to take more into consideration what needs are being talked about at the grass roots level. It is the role of both board and staff to find a resolution to those needs in the overall context of language continuation.
This paper has been written in standard English by a non-Aboriginal staff member who has worked for the organisation since February 2002, with advice and guidance from Aboriginal colleagues and the 2008–10 Board of Directors. Historical and other information about the organisation is based on project reports and administrative paperwork, for example meeting minutes, government reporting documents, staff reports, strategic and business plans. Verbal and anecdotal evidence which has been documented and email communications are also used. The views set out in this paper are not the views of one person but of Aboriginal peoples from a wide range of language and personal backgrounds. It is the goal of this paper that these views will be listened to respectfully within academic and government contexts.
The Board of Directors was previously the Executive Committee. Reference to board and directors refers to both past and present governance.
The KLRC uses the term language continuation to refer to all strategies language groups in the Kimberley are using to keep their languages alive. The goal of any strategy is to have languages spoken into the future in whatever way is appropriate for a group or community. This term avoids others such as revitalisation, reclamation and maintenance. Categorising a language’s vitality can limit the type of language activity proposed. For example, for a language with one remaining fluent speaker documentation is argued to be a priority to preserve the language whereas language nests can be equally appropriate for the community to wake up the language.
Aboriginal activist, anthropologist and linguist Gloria Brennan first put forward the idea of Aboriginal, locally controlled ‘institutes of Aboriginal languages’ (1979, pp. 52–55). Various Kimberley Aboriginal people and linguists working in the area consulted with Aboriginal groups and organisations about similar ideas. In 1984 funding was received to run a pilot study across the region called the Kimberley Language Support Project. The subsequent report Keeping Language Strong (Hudson & McConvell 1985) identified a broad range of issues such as concerns about loss of intergenerational language transmission, concerns about the effect of English on the languages and the need for advocacy to government, as well as ideas on orthographies and resource development. All are still current topics.
The KLRC became the first regional language centre, incorporated in 1985. After 24 years the organisation has cemented its status with Aboriginal people as the peak representative body for languages within the region. It services an area of 422 000 square kilometres with six towns, approximately 50 remote Aboriginal communities and numerous outstations. Aboriginal people form almost 48% of the population, a target group of roughly 16 500 people (Kimberley Development Commission 2009).
The KLRC is governed by an elected board of 12 Aboriginal directors under the recently revised Office for Indigenous Corporation rules. The board, elected at an AGM, is chosen from and accountable to a 200 plus membership representative of the 30 or so languages still spoken in the Kimberley (about a fifth of the remaining national languages). Directors sit on the board for two years. The governance factor has an important role in setting an Aboriginal agenda, as will be discussed below.
The recommendations from Keeping Language Strong are wide-ranging and refer to research, school programs, orthographies, repatriating materials and setting up and staffing an office. Recommendation 19 states, ‘community adults and schools jointly shoulder the burden of responsibility for keeping Aboriginal languages strong according to their particular expertise’ (Hudson & McConvell 1985, p.89).
However, despite a summary of the issues precipitating the loss of languages in the community (pp. 35–37), proposals on how schools and the research community can work with Aboriginal people to change attitudes to language (pp.40–44) and a mention of the importance of speaking to children in languages (p.59), the report does not provide any specific recommendation on how Aboriginal people could overcome barriers to oral language acquisition in children in their community.
In 1993, internal correspondence to a coordinator from a linguist set out in stages a strategy for languages with less than 100 speakers (KLRC 1993). Stage one proposed to document the languages and make resources ‘before it’s too late’; stage two to use those resources in language classes, which would lead to stage three, the languages becoming first languages again. There is no timeframe set.
This literacy-based approach to language continuation was reaffirmed in a collection of draft policy documents from 1995. One states the ‘KLRC considers it important to undertake research work towards a grammar and a dictionary over the production of other kinds of ‘applied’ materials’ (KLRC 1995, p. 1). There was no indication in these policies how stage three above, languages becoming first languages using language teaching materials, could realistically be achieved. Neither is there mention of strategies to revive spoken language in pre-school children or promote community responsibility for that. Applied materials are noted to be impossible to develop without basic research having been done on the language first, that is a grammar or dictionary.
In 1998 a strategic planning process led to the production of the first Strategic Plan (KLRC 2000). The stated aims at that time were: Ensure the KLRC has the necessary physical and human resources to achieve its vision, Advocate on behalf of languages at all levels, Help keep languages strong by ensuring resources and information are accessible Keep language strong by undertaking community-driven projects, Keep language strong by assisting with passing of language on to children, Keep language strong by helping adults to learn, Effectively monitor, evaluate and review the performance of the KLRC.
Even though passing on language to children is an aim, only one objective in the strategic plan refers to oral language. This is a reference to kōhanga reo5 that a coordinator in the early 1990s supported. Linguistic discussion of oral learning programs had taken place but within the context of Western education (compare McConvell 1986).
Aboriginal staff members from that time state the language nests were managed by the community because linguists did not appear to be interested. One language nest in particular was anecdotally successful as the participants, now teenagers, are speaking the language with some fluency. However funding from the Western Australian Department of Education was withdrawn in 2001 and lobbying for ongoing funding by the language groups involved did not succeed. Despite the well-documented success of language nests in New Zealand and Hawai’i, a strategy that might have ensured future language speakers was simply stopped.
The focus of the pilot study recommendations influenced the organisation’s management model, since documentation and resource development relied on university-trained linguists. When a language group or community sent a request to the board the submission for funds invariably included wages for a linguist or other specialist to oversee discrete projects. Over the years a symbiotic relationship was created. Many Aboriginal people, particularly non-literate older generations, believed that language work through the KLRC only had a high status if a non-Aboriginal specialist was involved in the work and it resulted in a grammar, dictionary or other written resource.