This case study examines the consequences of community language attitudes and ideologies on later-generation heritage speakers through qualitative sociolinguistic and discourse analysis of 22 interviews with first and second generation Latinos of diverse backgrounds in a major US metropolitan area. The findings show that imposed deficit identities derived from ideologies of language purity, proficiency, and individual agency were misunderstood and stigmatized later-generation heritage speakers, leading to language insecurity and avoidance despite overtly positive attitudes toward Spanish maintenance. Results demonstrate the resilience of prescriptive/purist language attitudes and the tension in- herent between these beliefs (albeit couched within positive heritage language attitudes) and speakers’ actual bilingualism. Further, they show that the ideologies of individual agency can paradoxically contribute to the imposition of deficit sociolinguistic identities on later-generation speakers and curtail their language use. The study renders visible connections between ideologies of language, identity, and agency and demonstrates how their reproduction within families and communities circumscribes later-generation heritage speakers’ linguistic identities and behavior.
This case study examines how ideologies of what it means to speak Spanish and of Spanish as part of Latino identity intersect with monolingual norms and ideologies of individual agency to negatively impact linguistic identities and language use of US-born bilinguals. While positive attitudes toward heritage languages generally encourage their transmission and maintenance, in my data, these attitudes also reflected ideologies of monolingual proficiency and individual agency that imposed deficit identities on later-generation speakers, erasing their actual bilingual competencies and contributing to language insecurity and avoidance. The findings shed new light into the complexities and tensions inherent within even ‘positive’ heritage language attitudes and demonstrate the power and endurance of restrictive ideologies of language, identity, and agency which transmitted within families and communities,1 constrain later-generations’ sociolinguistic identities, language use, and affective relationship with the heritage language.
Language is a powerful index of social identity, including ethnocultural affiliation (Fought 2006). This relationship is not static or a priori assigned but constructed through social interaction about attitudes and ideologies about languages and speakers (Bourdieu 1991; Silverstein 2003; Bucholtz and Hall 2005), where ideologies are reductivist/axiomatic sets of beliefs which are socioculturally motivated and can themselves generate further meanings (VanDijk 1998; Irvine and Gal 2009).
Identity is a key aspect of minority language acquisition and maintenance which relates to socialization (Schieffelin and Ochs 1986), imagined learner selves and communities (Pavlenko and Norton 2007; Do ̈rnyei and Ushioda 2009), and speaker agency. While the agency is often seen as a positive factor in language learning (Norton-Peirce 1995; Williams and Burden 1997), my findings show that the intersection of ascribed individual agency with beliefs about language proficiency and identity can negatively impact heritage speakers, a point which I return to in the following sections. The symbolic importance of language in group membership and associated qualities, such as values, authenticity, and belonging (Irvine and Gal 2009), influences its use or avoidance. Research worldwide shows that community contact and the desire to maintain ethnocultural identity support positive language attitudes, loyalty, and maintenance (Fishman 1966; Lynch 2003; Bradley 2013). In the example of US Latinos, Spanish is strongly associated with Latino identity (Urciuoli 2008). Further, the relationship between Spanish and Latino identity is complicated by local identities and language attitudes, such as acceptance or rejection of notions of ‘proper Spanish’ (Coryell et al. 2010; Helmer 2011).
However, linguistic identities are susceptible to hegemonic social pressure. Political and educational policies enforce a privileged role for dominant languages and repress minority languages (May [2001]2012). The US’s history of language suppression includes English-only legislation and opposition to bilingual education (Wiley 2012); within this, Spanish, despite being the second most spoken language nationwide, is targeted as ‘undesirable’ due to prejudice against Latinos (Leeman 2012; Gonzalez-Barrera and Lopez 2013). This social and linguistic discrimination can cause ambivalent or negative home language attitudes.
The link between language and identity makes bilingualism ideological (Heller 2007: 1–22). However, bilinguals are often misunderstood due to (i) ideologies of ‘one culture, one language, one people’, which assume a direct and exclusive connection between language, ethnicity, and national identity and (ii) ideologies of proficiency which privilege the ‘native speaker’—itself a constructed subject position—as the ultimate embodiment of language and culture (Davies 2003; Holliday 2006). Monolingual bias elevates monolingual speech behavior such that bilingualism is understood as ‘two monolinguals in one’, where ‘real’ bilinguals are indistinguishable from monolinguals in both languages, and anything else is dismissed as inadequate language use (Grosjean 2010: 20). This belief leads to the intersection of ideologies about proficiency and prescriptivism or ideologies of linguistic correctness and ‘efforts to regulate the language of others’ (Straaijer 2016, cf Curzan 2014: 17), resulting in conflated discourses of proficiency, language purity, and ‘in- correctness’. Negative attitudes in schools and families toward ‘non-native accents’ and language mixing (Helmer 2011; Carruba-Rogel 2018) stigmatize phenomena, which are a natural part of language contact and change (Dillard 1962; Bhatt 1995; Kachru 2017), and heritage speakers’ use of nonstandard regional varieties and informal registers is sometimes misidentified as lack of proficiency (Lynch 2012). Assumptions also intersect with deficiency beliefs about minoritized social groups so that bilingual language is dismissed as ‘broken’ or deficient (Valde ́s 2001; MacSwan 2005; Grosjean 2010) and linguistic
Finally, the ideologies surrounding bilingualism and linguistic identity interact with ideologies of language agency. Agency is increasingly understood as relational and dynamic rather than as an ‘individual internal state or quality’ (Bucholtz et al. 2018: 4) closely associated with motivation,3 as has been traditional in applied linguistics and education. Ahearn’s (2010) influential definition understands agency as ‘the socioculturally mediated capacity to act’ (p. 28), a capacity which is simultaneously individual, relational/interpersonal (Mercer 2012), socially contextualized, and political (Bucholtz et al. 2018). However, ideologies of the individual agency remain influential in obscuring the social conditions or ‘complex ecology of affordances and constraints’, which are embedded within social histories and which conscribe individuals capacities to act (Miller 2016: 345–55). Since meta-understandings of agency relate to ‘notions of personhood and causality’ (Ahearn 2010: 30), individualized ideologies of agency contribute to moral discourses of praise (Park 2010) and blame in language learning. hybridity stigmatized (Zentella 1997). The term ‘heritage speakers’,2 encompassing speakers’ sociocultural relationship to a language as well as the full range of bilingual competencies, arose to challenge these deficit perspectives (Valde ́s 2001; Lynch, 2003; Hornberger and Wang 2008). However, ‘com- mon-sense’ myths such as ‘bilinguals have equal and perfect knowledge of their languages ... have no accent in their different languages ... [and] mixing languages is a sign of laziness’ (Grosjean 2010: xv) continue to affect heritage speakers in schools, communities, and broader society.
Data comprise 22 conversational sociolinguistic interviews conducted with first- and second-generation Latin American immigrants (11 males and 11 females) of diverse national and ethnoracial backgrounds, recruited through community contacts and chain-referral (‘snowball’) sampling in the Washington, DC, metropolitan area. Twelve participants are first-generation immigrants and 10 were born in the USA. Participants are Spanish–English- speaking bilinguals, speaking both languages regularly. Most have experienced some Spanish-language education in Latin America or US schools. Participants are working or middle class, as defined by occupation and terminal level of education or, if still dependents, that of the head of household. The largest age cohort was 20–30 years old. Consistent with regional demographics, the majority of participants were of Central American origin, and Salvadorans are the largest national group (23%). The remainder came from diverse Latin American origins (Table 1). 
Interviews were casual, typically between 40 and 90 minutes, and conducted in informal, nonclassroom settings, such as coffee shops, on campus, at organizations, and in homes. They were loosely guided by question modules on language and identity, such as immigration, daily life, language attitudes and language use, and popular perceptions of Latinos. Sample questions included ‘What is Latino life like in D.C.?’, ‘Do you think there are stereotypes about Latino people?’, ‘What does being Latino mean to you?’, ‘Is language an important part of Latino identity?’, and ‘How do you feel about your Spanish and English abilities?’ Seventeen interviews were conducted one-on- one by the researcher, a non-white non-Latino second-generation immigrant who speaks fluent Spanish and participates in local Latino social networks. The combination of peripheral community membership and word-of-mouth recommendation, coupled with the shared experience of racial minoritization, family migration, and intergenerational bilingualism, encouraged frankness and a sense of commonality. Participants were made aware that the researcher spoke Spanish (many already knew this, given word-of-mouth referral) and that interviews could be conducted in English, Spanish, or a combination as they preferred. Following participant language leads, the interviews were conducted in English with code-switching. The remaining five interviews were conducted in English by non-Latino interviewers,4 four one-on-one and one-by-two interviews. These interviews were also loosely guided by sociolinguistic questions designed to elicit casual speech following Labov (1972), such as ‘What was it like when you were growing up?’ which elicited participants’ thoughts and experiences with Latino identity, Spanish, and migration. Open coding identified themes such as family, Latino identity, and language. Metalinguistic and meta-agentive discourse (Ahearn 2010) uncovered participants’ attitudes and ideologies about Spanish, Latino identity, and lan- guage agency. Participants’ discursive identity construction also revealed these ideologies as they positioned themselves and others as Spanish speakers and Latinos in the interviews while drawing on broader reported experiences. Positioning refers to discursively enacted subject relations, enacted through diverse ‘contextualization cues’ (Gumperz 1982) and discursive stances (like evaluation and affect) toward conversational objects (Du Bois 2007), through which speakers construct, impose, accept/reject, and evaluate identities (Van Langenhove and Harre ́ 1999), and force others/are themselves forced to re- spond to these positions (Harre ́ and Van Langenhove 1991). Broad transcription conventions were modified from Cashman(2005) and De Fina (2003)
The following excerpts are representative examples. Participants’ beliefs that speaking Spanish is an important index of culture and identity. When asked if she thinks her children will lose Spanish, ‘Michelle’, a first-generation Panamanian immigrant married to a Bolivian, described Spanish home use and her desire to transmit the language.
Michelle associates Spanish with Latino identity generally and in terms of specific cultures. Her metacommentary and stances toward Spanish demonstrate positive attitudes toward the language, position it as essential to culture and family, and position her as an agent of language and cultural transmission for her US-born children. Michelle’s expressions of volition (‘I wanna’) portray home-Spanish use as a choice, as elsewhere in the interview she makes it clear that she and her husband are bilingual. This contrasts with her general description of younger-generation speakers, to whom she ascribes agency in language avoidance (‘a lot of kids [at church] don’t want to speak [Spanish]’). Michelle viewed Spanish maintenance as a family responsibility and as a family and individual choice. 
In another example, ‘Raimundo’, a second-generation Caribbean Latino immigrant articulated the indexical relationship between Spanish and Latino identity while describing how ethnic identity boundaries are reified through language: ‘If you are Latino but don’t have the cultural connection or speak the language (.) You don’t get the discount. Without the language, you lack the credentials, therefore you will not be accepted by the group.’ Here, ‘getting the discount’ is a humorous reference to group acceptance; ‘Raimundo’s’ second utterance clarifies that speaking Spanish is a non-negotiable part of ingroup credentials, resonating with previous research that authentic Latino identity is equated with Spanish proficiency (Urciuoli 2008). However, as will be explored in the discussion from Excerpt 5 on, participants’ perceptions of what it means to speak Spanish were as much ideological as reflective of actual language behavior. 
Similarly, ‘not speaking the language’ was seen as a rejection of Latino identity and by extension assimilation to Americanness. ‘Diana’, a first-generation South American immigrant, described Spanish as part of her Latina identity, together with her preference for Spanish-language music and dancing, and a primarily Latino friend group. She contrasted this with her ‘Americanized’ younger sister’s preference for English, American rock music (negatively evaluated as ‘shit’), and non-Latino friends: ‘She’s more Americanized than I am. I like to keep to my roots.’ As part of this, she portrays her sister as reluctant to speak Spanish, providing poor translations for their father: 
Diana’s positive evaluative stance toward her detailed translation is supported by her father’s reported preference for her help over her sister’s. Her sister’s translation skills are positioned as inferior, with the interviewer’s laughter acknowledging the contrastive evaluation. By taking stances toward Spanish translation for her father, Diana positions herself as a superior speaker and constructs her identity as the more culturally authentic sibling. Diana viewed Spanish maintenance as a question of individual agency and choice, making it an index of cultural orientation and personal identity.
Having given key examples of language as an index of culture and identity, I turn to participants’ understandings of proficiency. Participants understood ‘speaking a language’ to mean monolingual-normed fluency. ‘Not speaking Spanish’ was considered to represent a lack of connection to Latino heritage. ‘Viviana’ is a first-generation immigrant whose parents’ residency status forced them return to Central America, leaving her in the USA. In the interview, Viviana’s reflection on her own Spanish abilities led to a narrative supporting her argument of being a fluent speaker. When evaluating her Spanish, she initially expressed insecurity around linguistic hybridity and correctness (‘sounding like a teacher’):
However, she then constructed a position of linguistic competence through comparison with other, less-fluent Latinos, using an account of an encounter with an immigration lawyer to support this identity claim.
She begins the narrative by describing the setting: a ‘Hispanic’ lawyer’s office. When the lawyer assumes she will only speak English, Viviana surprises him by speaking in Spanish. Her linguistic agency has a positive affective consequence, making her feel ‘good’. Through constructed dialogue, Viviana describes how the lawyer congratulated her mother on her daughter’s ‘good’ Spanish and bilingualism. This positive evaluative stance is emphasized by Viviana’s narrative technique, drawing out the lawyer’s actions to emphasize his response. Viviana’s report of her mother’s pride, expressed through conversation with family, also takes a positive stance toward her Spanish. Others’ positive evaluation of her Spanish, the lawyer’s and her mother’s, strengthen Viviana’s argument that her Spanish is ‘good’ and indicates the attitudes she expresses are shared by her family and in the community (an attitude the researcher keys into). Viviana’s narrative also illustrates the belief that good bilingualism consists of monolingual-normed fluency in both languages. Finally, the language agency in Viviana’s positively celebrated language fluency was located not only in her as an individual but also seen as a family achievement.
Viviana’s self-positioning as a Spanish speaker simultaneously constructs a contrastive other position. These ‘others’ are English-dominant, younger-generation Latinos (‘he saw this, younger lady and I guess that’s what, that’s what he has seen, you know a mom come and then, but the son’s like, in English’) and are explicitly negatively evaluated elsewhere in her interview: ‘Some Latinos look at other Latinos and you’re like wait a minute, you look Latino but you’re not speaking to me in Spanish what’s wrong with you (hhh)’. While Viviana first expresses the censuring group gaze through third- person referents (‘some Latinos ), pronominal shift to the second person makes it clear that she shares the attitude being voiced. The shift from collective to individual voicing positions her in the gatekeeping in-group which judges non-Spanish-speaking Latinos as having ‘something wrong with them’ for agentively not speaking in Spanish.
The social meaning of ‘not speaking Spanish’ is elaborated by ‘Celia’, a first-generation South American immigrant, as she discusses the criticism her two sons face at community events. Excerpt 5 demonstrates the negative evaluation they face from adult community members and illuminates the tension between the boys’ assumed lack of Spanish and their actual bilingual abilities.
Celia describes the same attitude of ‘there’s something wrong with you’, which she attributes to ‘the Hispanics’ as both an abstract referent group and her local community. Criticism for ‘not speaking Spanish’ causes shame (keyed into by the researcher, who attempts to mitigate it by saying ‘It’s tough’): her sons ‘turn red’ and attempt to defend themselves (‘Sı ́, entiendo. Pero no hablo.’/‘Yes, I understand. But I can’t speak.’). This shows that a gap exists between community understanding of bilingualism and the actual practices of younger bilinguals. As Celia’s reported speech of her sons demonstrates, they understand and are able to respond in Spanish, although their comprehension may outstrip their production (as is common for heritage speakers; Montrul 2010). Rather than being supported, their bilingual ability is not recognized in the community. They are shamed for their linguistic ‘inadequacy’ and positioned as deficient Latinos. Community shaming of her sons for not speaking Spanish extends to Celia since, as a parent, she is responsible for transmitting language and culture; she defends herself by describing her daughter’s fluency to reposition herself as a successful language transmitter. Celia’s community shaming for inadequate language transmission highlights the belief that agency in language maintenance rests in families and individuals—her sons as speakers, and herself as language transmitter.
The aforementioned discourses imposed an identity of linguistic inadequacy on second-generation immigrants (variously described as ‘born here’, ‘kids’, ‘the younger generation’) which is iconic (Irvine and Gal 2009), or symbolically representative irrespective of actual abilities and behavior. For example, ‘Ine ́s’, a first-generation Central American immigrant, stated, ‘We [in the community] do have a large number of Latino kids that don’t speak Spanish very well ... their Spanish is broken.’ ‘A ́ ngel’, a first-generation South American immigrant, when discussing families stated that ‘all’ US-born Latinos are English dominant:
Maureen expressed pressure to speak ‘proper’ Spanish, lest she be judged by other Latinos, specifically mentioning accent-related shame. For her, an occasional non-native accent is ‘improper’ and reveals that she doesn’t speak Spanish as she should. This causes her to avoid speaking Spanish to avoid embarrassment and being identified as second-generation (conflated with speaking badly). The ideologies of language purity she has been socialized into and internalized, which are reinforced in interactions with other Latinos, cause language anxiety and avoidance (‘It’s [accent] very embarrassing to me which is why, I don’t speak as often as I should now’). Community pressure to live up to a monolingual norm, and the desire to avoid an imposed deficit identity, curtail her agentive language use.
Some resistance to the imposition of deficit identities on second-generation immigrants was observed. ‘He ́ctor’, a second-generation immigrant of Central American origins, reported that Latinos who do not speak Spanish (or who don’t speak it well enough to ‘count’) may avoid other Latinos to avoid censure and teasing but also contested the discourse that not speaking Spanish deauthenticates ethnic identity: ‘I know a lot of Latinos that, don’t speak, Spanish, and they don’t want to get close to Latinos because they’re- they’re scared of being made fun of. You know what I’m saying? But they look Latino and they are Latinos,’ an attitude consistent with other research on intergen- erational US Latino language and identity change (Beaudrie et al. 2009; Bost and Aparicio 2012; Lopez 2016).
However, while He ́ctor contests the one-to-one indexical relationship between Spanish and ethnocultural identity which positions him and other US-born Latinos as linguistically decient and culturally inauthentic, he still eval- uates his own Spanish in terms of community perception of in/out-group membership and ideologies of idealized proficiency. Further, he reports that his confidence, identity, and language use are affected by internalized linguis- tic insecurity and fear of judgment:
Internalized reductivist and essentialized linguistic ideologies impose a deficit speaker identity on He ́ctor and conscribe his linguistic agency even as he contests the ideology that Latinos must speak Spanish. His linguistic insecurity intersects with notions of correctness based on sounding non-native (specifically labeled as ‘gringo’, non-Latino) that create identity tension and fear of community judgment (‘people down the street can hear me and be like, ‘’This guy’s a gringo’’ ’). Interestingly, he draws attention to other context factors that affect his language that his language comfort and use, specifically the social positioning, race, and social class (described elsewhere in his interview) of his Latino interlocutors.
Findings render visible intersections between ideologies of language, identity, proficiency, and agency, unpacking the tensions they cause within positive language attitudes, and underscoring their pervasiveness and impact on later- generation linguistic identities and language behavior. In the data, imposed deficit identities derived from ideologies of language purity, proficiency, and individual agency misunderstood and stigmatized later-generation heritage speakers, leading to language insecurity and avoidance despite shared positive attitudes toward Spanish maintenance.
Spanish proficiency was a stance object around which identities were constructed and discourses of morality and identity imposed. However, purist language beliefs imposed deficiency identities on second-generation speakers regardless of actual language use. Rather than being validated, their actual bi-lingualism was overlooked in favor of an idealized native-speaker target, and the label of inadequate Spanish was imposed as an iconic aspect of generational identity. The second-generation speakers did not generally resist the imposed positioning of themselves as inadequate Spanish speakers, indicating the durability of ideological constellations encompassing monolingual ideology, native-speakerism, and notions of language purity and correctness. Even He ́ctor, who contested the notion that Latinos ‘must’ speak (native-like) Spanish, had internalized insecurity about his Spanish—insecurity into which he was socialized through community interactions and judgment. The second generation speakers reported that the resultant linguistic insecurity led them to avoid Spanish in settings that warranted its use. This finding resonate with the previous research showing that well-intentioned purism can discourage heritage language use (Bradley 2013: 6–7; cf Dorian 1994; also see Hill and Hill’s 1986 work on Nahuatl and Spanish bilingualism in Mexico) and expands the ideological constellation to include related ideologies of agency, ethnicity, and belonging.
The first-generation immigrants force-positioned second-generation immigrants as inadequate speakers both in interviews and in reported interactions, a positioning which second-generation participants had internalized. The strong indexical relationship between home language and ethnocultural identity, coupled with the belief that ‘speaking a language’ entails native-like proficiency, made Spanish a potent site of Latino identity gatekeeping. It thus not only undermined second-generation speakers’ identities as competent Spanish speakers but also led to questioning of later generations’ authenticity and group membership. For example, ‘Diana’ positioned her younger sister as not only a bad translator but ‘Americanized’. This forced positioning was imposed on and became embodied by second-generation Latinos (‘born here’), where ‘second generation’ was understood as shorthand for ‘speaking badly’.
Ideologies of agency played an important role in the constellation of socio-linguistic ideologies that affected speaker identities and language behavior. Participants saw agency as a question of individual action. While first- and second-generation participants experienced this differently—first-generation participants expressed insecurity about successfully transmitting Spanish to their children, rather than their own proficiency—they nonetheless shared a view of agency as fundamentally individual and language learning as a personal (individual and family) responsibility. Similar to ideologies of proficiency and correctness, the ideology of individual agency erased and, paradoxically, curtailed later-generation speakers’ actual linguistic agency as well as causing identity tension, as in this case the perceived ‘willful rejection’ of the minority language and culture. This finding echoes Mercer’s (2012) articulation of the consequences of interpersonal relationships for individual identity and agency, and resonates with Dressler’s (2010)  finding that family or community positioning of later generations as heritage speakers (or not) affects their identities as such.
Further, the primacy of the ideology of individual agency erases social forces that mandate against language maintenance and curtail individual agency.  Ideologies of agency attributed ‘inadequate’ Spanish and, more broadly, language shift or loss to individuals while erasing the influence of hegemonic social organization. This narrow understanding of agency is an important aspect of the stigmatization and disempowerment of later-generation speakers, and the imposition and internalization of negative sociolinguistic identities. As Miller (2016) notes,